Parliamentary Links Day

Designing a New Weather and Climate Forecasting Model

Gung-Ho: A UK project to design and build the dynamical core of a new weather and climate forecasting model. 

Collaborative between:
UK Met Office
Various Natural Environment Research Council funded academics
Science and Technology Facilities Centre

This project is envied worldwide:
We are scoping and designing the model properly before writing it
Expertise in universities collaborating with Met Office
Creative research council funding 

What is a "dynamical core"?
It is the heart of a weather or climate model that predicts the winds, pressure and temperature. Additional routines predict clouds, solar radiation, pollutant concentrations and their impact on the climate
background - 3d grid (Palais)

Why do we need a new dynamical core?
The UK models are already (probably) the best in the world?
But we need larger computers to make accurate regional predictions of climate change
But they only run efficiently on old-fashioned, power hungry computers
largest super-computers ~10MW, Boeing 747 140MW
The next generation of super-computers use less powerful processors which use much less energy.
We therefore need to link around a million less powerful processors together.
Divide the atmosphere and ocean into small regions for each of the processors.
However the weather in one location is linked with the weather elsewhere.
Therefore lots of communication between processors.
The current Met Office model needs too much communication
Therefore it can only run efficiently on up to 1000 processors. Not a million
How can we design a model that needs less communication?

Lat-lon grid
Other grids
Other international centres already use other grids
They are having problems
We are going to learn from their difficulties and design another world beating model but this time one that does not use a lat-lon grid

Conclusions
UK Met Office brilliant
Flexible research council funding is enabling this innovative project
The UK will stay at the top in weather and climate forecasting

